At the Sainsbury Wellcome Centre for Neural Circuts and Behavior (SWC) and at
the Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit (GCNU) we are performing a radically
new type of experimentation, that is Naturalistic, Long Duration, and Continual
(NaLoDuCo). We are recording bahavioral and electrophsiological data
continuosly for weeks to months, while mice forage, indidually or socially, in
large naturalistic arenas.

The Allen Institute for Neural Dynamics (AIND) is also creating software and
hadware technology, and doing research, on foraging along two parallel paths.
First, they are investigating the neural basis of foraging behavior in shorter
virtual reality experiments on head fixed mice. Second, they are studying how
freely moving mice learn while they naturally explore odors in long-duration
experiments.

The SWC/GCNU and the AIND have complementary expertise in foraging research.
%
The SWC/GCNU are experienced in NaLoDuCo experimentation. Since 2021 they have
been creating software and hardware infrastructure to enable NaLoDuCo foraging
research, and have successfully used this technology to perform simultaneous
behavioral and neural recordings in mice foraging in large arenas for weeks to
months.
%
The GCNU is a leader in developing advanced neural data analysis methods, that
will be essential to understand data generated by NaLoDuCo experiments.
%
The AIND is also experienced in foraging research, and is a pioneer in
generating and openly disseminating high-quality neural datasets at scale.

Here we propose to join forces to co-develop NaLoDuCo experimentation
technology and disseminate it openly to facilitate the adoption of NaLoDuCo
experimentation by research groups around the world.

